# CGAL Scilab support

These bindings support Scilab, but additional work is required compared to other
languages.  Scilab (as of version 5) has a 24-character limit on all of its
variable names; longer names are truncated with a warning.  This document
explains the naming conventions and the rename process for the Scilab bindings.
Scilab also only supports hierarchical namespaces in a limited fashion.

SWIG's default behaviour for member functions with Scilab is to bind a function
such as `Line_3::direction` to a Scilab function `Line_3_direction`.  There are
many cases where this combined identifier is over the 24-character limit, and
there are also cases where the member function name alone is over the limit.
Examples are `Tetrahedron_3::has_on_unbounded_side` and
`Polygon_2::is_counterclockwise_oriented`.

To work around this, in Scilab we introduce a hierarchical namespace below
`cgal`, built using a tree of Scilab `struct`s that contain the foreign function
pointers.  This scheme is applied to all SWIG\_CGAL classes, and names are
otherwise left alone when possible, so for example, the method above becomes
`cgal.Line_3.direction`.  `new` and `delete` bindings are provided for each
class automatically (`cgal.Line_3.new` and `cgal.Line_3.delete` bind to
`new_Line_3` and `delete_Line_3` respectively).

There are also means for renaming individual classes and functions whose names
are still too long.

## Code generation

The SWIG\_CGAL build process for Scilab differs from that for other languages in
that it has an extra step to automatically generate the hierarchical namespace
from a description file.  At build time, the rename generator
(`tools/scilab-rename-gen.bash`) reads a description file for each package, and
outputs two files:

- A SWIG `.i` file containing `%rename` directives.  This file is included by
  the main `.i` file for the package.

- An alternate Scilab loader `.sce` file that first invokes the SWIG-generated
  `loader.sce` to load the bindings, then rebinds them into the hierarchical
  namespace.

The build process for Scilab is illustrated [here](build-process-scilab.svg).

## The rename description file

The rename description file lists classes and functions that should be exposed
to Scilab by the rename generator.  It has a simple syntax, with each line
containing one command, and possibly arguments separated by whitespace.  Blank
lines are ignored, and end-of-line comments are indicated started with `//`,
either on blank lines or on lines with commands.  The C preprocessor is run over
this file, so it may be split into multiple `#include`d files.

The valid commands are as follows:

- **function** _functionPath [ scilabName ]_

  Declares the C++ non-member function _functionPath_ to have renames generated
  for it.  _functionPath_ should specify the namespace (at least one `::`),
  otherwise the renamer would rename _all_ functions named _functionPath_ (this
  is disallowed for now, since it is not required).  The Scilab name for the
  function will be _scilabName_, or the final component of _functionPath_
  (namespaces removed) if no second argument is given.  Member functions must
  use **method** instead.

- **class** _className [ scilabName ]_

  Declares the C++ class _className_ to have renames generated for it.  The
  Scilab name for the class will be _scilabName_, or _className_ if no second
  argument is given.  Subsequent member and trait declarations will belong to
  this class, until the next **class** command is reached.

- **member** _memberName [ scilabName [ intermediateName ] ]_

  Must follow a **class** command.  Creates a binding for the member function
  named _memberName_ in the current class.  No argument list should be provided.
  Operator functions are supported, and should be specified for example as
  _operator+_ with no whitespace before the symbol.  The same member name will
  be used within Scilab if _scilabName_ is not given; an upper-case alphabetic
  name will be used for an operator function.  _scilabName_ may also be `-` to
  force the default name to be used.

  For member functions, an intermediate name is created for SWIG to `%rename` to
  and for Scilab to use.  Because we're renaming to avoid the 24-character
  limit, this intermediate doesn't include the full class and method names, but
  it still needs to obey the limit.  The default intermediate name includes the
  class name but not the method name.  In cases where this autogenerated name is
  still too long, it is necessary to provide a manual intermediate name (or,
  shorten the class name).  _intermediateName_ may be used for this purpose.

- **bind-member** _scilabName scilabVar_

  Must follow a **class** command.  Creates a binding called _scilabName_ in the
  class's Scilab interface, that contains the value in the Scilab variable
  _scilabVar_.

- **trait** _traitName_

  Must follow a **class** command.  Declares some common functionality for a
  class.  Valid _traitName_ values are:

  - **equatable**: Declares `operator==` and `operator!=`.
  - **ordered**: Declares `operator<`, `operator<=`, `operator>`, `operator>=`,
    and implies **trait equatable**.
